---
title: Manual dev setup
reviewers: Dr Marcus Baw
---

If you prefer to set up a development environment manually, here are the steps. Please note that we do not provide support for developers using a bespoke setup, only the Docker development environment is supported.

This manual approach will require you to have much more familiarity with configuring PostgresQL, Django, and Python to achieve your aims, and is not for beginners.

## Install PostgreSQL and create the database with the correct credentials

You will need the [Postgresql](https://www.postgresql.org/) database, which can be installed natively on your development machine, or (recommended) can be installed using Docker.

Using the command below will create a development database with credentials that match those in our `example.env` file.
You will need Docker to be installed on your local machine. (Please search the web for instructions for installation on your operating system and setup)

```console
docker run --name epilepsy12postgres \
    -e POSTGRES_USER=epilepsy12user \
    -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=epilepsy12 \
    -e POSTGRES_DB=epilepsy12db \
    -p 5432:5432 \
    -d postgres
```

## Install the correct Python version

If you don't have python 3.10 installed already, you will need it.

We recommend the use of a tool such as [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) to assist with managing multiple Python versions and their accompanying virtualenvs.

```console
pyenv install 3.10.0
```

> On some platforms, you will get errors at build-time, which indicates you need to install some dependencies which are required for building the Python binaries locally. Rather than listing these here, where they may become out of date, please refer to the [pyenv wiki](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv/wiki) which covers this in detail.

Then create a virtual environment:

```console
pyenv virtualenv 3.10.0 rcpch-audit-engine
```

Clone the repository and `cd` into the directory:

```console
git clone https://github.com/rcpch/rcpch-audit-engine.git
cd rcpch-audit-engine
```

Then install all the requirements. Note you can't do this without PostgreSQL already installed first.

```console
pip install -r requirements/development-requirements.txt
```

## Initialize the environment variables

```console
source example.env
```

!!! danger
The included example environment variables are not secure and must never be used in production.

## Prepare the database for use

```console
s/migrate
```

## Create superuser to enable logging into admin section

```console
python manage.py createsuperuser
```

Then follow the command line prompts to create the first user. Createsuperuser is a django base feature but there are some custom fields which are mandatory. These include:

- role: It is not possible easily to override the CLI for this function. The options are: 1 - Clinical Lead, 2 - Clinician, 3 - E12 Site Administrator, 4 - RCPCH Audit Team. If the integer selected in 1-3 (ie a role within the E12 site, KCH is automatically allocated. If it is an RCPCH user, is_rcpcph_staff is automatically set to true, as it is_rcpch_audit_team_member)
- is_rcpch_audit_team_member: invites a True/False reply.

Further users can subsequently be created in the Admin UI

## Running the server

Navigate to the epilepsy12 outer folder and run the server:

```console
s/runserver
```

or

you may need to allow permissions to run the bash script in that folder first:

```console
chmod +x ./s/runserver
chmod +x ./s/migrate
chmod +x ./s/seed
chmod +x ./s/init
```

## Seeding the Database

Migrations 002 to 011 will seed the database with the following:

- Organisations
- Trusts
- ICBs (including boundaries)
- NHS England regions (including boundaries)
- Countries (including boundaries)
- KPI aggregations (the tables required to store the results generated by counting up KPIs for individual children at different levels of abstraction eg trust/icb etc)
- Epilepsy causes, syndromes and comorbidities: these are all pulled from SNOMED and persisted in their own tables
- Semiology keywords. These are ILAE 2017 keywords to standardise the description of a seizure. It is not an exhaustive list and in time it is hoped through this project that new meaningful words will be identified and add to this lexicon.

By running the migrations there database will therefore be ready to accept new users and children.

In development, it is often necessary to have some seeded children across multiple organisations to test functionality, so in addition there are 2 further seed commands:

```console
python manage.py seed --mode=seed_cases
```

This accepts the ```-c``` or ```cases``` attribute followed by the number of children requested. It defaults to 200. Children are given random dates of birth, NHS numbers and postcodes which are all valid.

Once the children have been seeded, they can be scored at random:

```console
python manage.py seed --mode seed_registrations
```

This accepts the ```-ct``` or ```cohort``` attribute followed by the cohort number requested. Note that it is not possible to seed with patients below cohort 4. It defaults to the current actively recruiting cohort.

Both functions accept the ```--verbose``` flag also to have a more granular output to the console of the seeding process for debugging purposes.

There are some other functions here also, but these are likely soon to be deprecated:

- add_permissions_to_existing_groups
- upload_old_patient_data
- async_upload_old_patient_data
- upload_user_data
- async_upload_user_data

If you want to seed with all these, there is a short cut in the start folder:

```console
s/docker-seed
```

This will seed with the defaults documented above.

## Running the tests locally

We have used the coverage package to test our models. It is already in our development requirements, but if you don't have it installed, install it with `pip install coverage`

Run all the tests

```console
coverage run manage.py test
coverage html
```

If the `htmlcov/index.html` is opened in the browser, gaps in outstanding testing of the models can be found.
